---
layout: post
title: Plugable Semantic/Lexical Search Service
site: https://www.macrometa.com/photoniq/hypersearch
role: Product Owner | Lead Engineer
date: 2024-08-01
priority: 2
categories: [AI, Data]
---

A semantic and lexical search engine for indexing and retrieving context-aware results from large volumes of structured and unstructured data. It supports complex queries with filters using vector similarity and lexical similarity, and can provide context-aware answers to questions based on search results. Data is ingested from sources like S3 buckets and websites. Then cleaned, chunked and optimized before creating embeddings for semantic search (RAG pipeline).

Key challenges included achieving indexing time of 1 million records in under 2 hours and delivering search results with AI-powered answers within 500ms. The solution involved trying out different transformers, distance types, and index types, as well as reranking results and providing configurable indexing options depending on the source data and customer requirements.

**Key responsibilities:**
- Led the design and implementation of data ingestion pipelines, document transformation processes, and indexing workflows.
- Developed semantic search APIs enabling flexible querying with metadata filters.
- Developed semantic, lexical search and AI answer features on top of GDN features.
- Contributed to and reviewed the React-based GUI console for configuring and testing indexing and search functionalities.

**Languages**: `Python`, `React`  
**Tools**:  
  - `Macrometa GDN` – Data store, Vector store and underlying search provider
  - `FastAPI` – HTTP framework and the interface to the users
  - `Docker & Kubernetes` – For deployment and scaling, including the production environments
  - `GitHub Actions` + `Argo` – CI and CD
